So if you wake up in the morning and you don't want to do something, you don't care enough about yourself. And that's what you need to really research is, man, why am I not doing this for myself? Because that is, that is the number one purpose in life, is to better oneself. Real talk, some of you motherfuckers piss me the fuck off. Gary's knees are bad. See how he runs. Um Yeah, see how I run 200 miles, motherfucker. What were you doing for the last 65 hours? I know what I was doing. I was running all up and down the fucking mountains. Doing what I preach about. Stay hard. If you're willing to suffer, and I mean suffer, your brain and your body, once connected together, can do anything. If you want to be great, you want to be the best motherfucker ever at what you do, you're gonna be misunderstood by everybody because you're gonna be so fucking obsessed and so driven to get there. That's what it takes. Do things you hate to do. Be uncomfortable every fucking day of your life. We're running from the truth. So the only way I became successful was going towards the truth. As painful and as brutal as it is, it changed me. It allowed me to become who I am today. I've trained 99% of my life alone. I can take myself to such a level of real, real passion and purpose by myself. I don't need anyone. That's why people come to me to motivate them. They don't know me, son. We all think about quitting when shit's hard, and this is where people lose. It's hard to process information during pain. You're thinking about fight or flight, save yourself. That's not a rational thought. It's not a thought that's gonna get you through hard times. I have a resume full of fucking motivation that whenever I'm down, I'm like, oh, hang on, motherfucker. Oh, you know, you know the truth. The only way you're ever going to get to the other side of this journey is you have got to suffer to grow. To grow, you must suffer, and some people will get it and some people won't. Because I wasn't gifted with brains, I wasn't gifted with God-given talent, so I knew to get to where I had to go, to be on the same playing field, I knew the work was going to be something that I didn't want to even, even attack. So I was just putting it off. But yet you did it. Because it haunted me. I was indestructible. Shin splints, stress fractures. I said to myself, who on this fucking earth would still be going right now? You are. I built Goggins from the ground up. I was born David Goggins. David Goggins wasn't good enough. He was a scared, bullied, abused kid who struggled in life. And no matter how hard I trained, no matter how ready I was, whenever something got tough for me, the real David Goggins would would come out and he would quit. So I had to build Goggins, and in that process, I have to go back to that mental lab. That's where I get better. I get better when I'm um waking up early knowing I don't have to do these things. That's where I get better. I did all of the work alone, and while I'm still hard on myself, I know what I did. You got to face a lot of shit, young man. You got a long journey ahead of you because you're gonna find out that while your dad did a lot of shit to you, you're gonna have to make it on your own. Because this world we live in is tough. It's tough. It will beat you down. The world and the life that we live in is the ultimate competitor. The world's tough. The world's tough. It will try to take you out. It will, it will find your weakness ah and it will just hammer you. So it's time to get back to work. Get back to work. Stop hearing yourself talk. Get off the podcast. Don't be on social media too much. Cut out all the fucking noise. Get back to the fucking mental lab because that's where the knowledge came from. You need to get to a point in your life where there's nothing can hurt you because you know exactly who you are. You've faced your demons. You were able to hear all your past traumas. You were able to listen to them. You're able to fucking say, okay, now I can now talk to people about what I went through. I'm no longer embarrassed. I'm no longer ashamed. Being ashamed is one of the biggest things that kill people nowadays in their minds, kill them from moving forward. I'm ashamed of myself. Don't ever be ashamed of anything you've done in your life. Face it, fix it, make it better. Everything I need is in my mental lab. Everything. Because I'm in constant study of myself. And I know what needs to be conquered because I'm constantly going through what I don't like, what I'm not comfortable with. I know, and only I can fix these problems because I have to face these problems. Unchosen suffering is going to happen, right? So the only thing that you can do is have some chosen suffering to prepare for it. It's the only thing you can do. That's the only thing you can practice for the unchosen suffering is have chosen suffering. Do something that sucks every day. I'm not trying to send a message of run 200 miles, be the best motherfucker in the world, but be tough. You better have a part about you that's tough, a part about you that can break down situations and get better and break down situations very quickly within some trauma in your life, some devastation in your life, because it's going to come. The devastation, the trauma is going to come, and you can't allow that to become a Jersey barrier. It can't be a Jersey barrier. It has to be something that you can maneuver through very quickly and move forward. That takes a lot of toughness. A lot of people, when you die, they figure out why you died. They figure out how you died in the autopsy. But we never do a live autopsy to figure out why we're dying while we are alive. And I was dying. I was living every day, but I was really dead. And so I figured it out. And once I figured it out, I was able to be born. I was able to be reborn. You must take this knowledge that you learn from all this shit is knowledge. So I'm just trying to give people that strength to go in the archives of your life because while you're probably fucked up, it's probably something happened to you in your life. Go through the archives, dig it up, study it, and then use it for yourself. That's that's the main purpose for me right now. You need to be better here. You need to be better here. You need to overcome this, overcome that, and I. You know, people need to have purpose to get up. They need purpose to perform. You need to get to a point in your life where there's nothing on the docket. There is no 5K, there's no, I'm going to get into school to be this or that, and still perform to the highest level. Because what people don't get is one day that thing's going to come up. And if you're not constantly performing without purpose, You're not gonna be ready when the time comes. It's this magical thing, purpose, that we're all looking for. But what's funny about it all is that we need these things to perform, but we don't take a second to realize the purpose is always there. The purpose never leaves us cuz the very purpose is you. You are always the purpose. There may be another purpose like being a SEAL or going to college or whatever, But the main purpose in life is you. So if you wake up in the morning and you don't want to do something, you don't care enough about yourself. And that's what you need to really research is why am I not doing this for myself? Because that is the number one purpose in life is to better oneself. So that's the only purpose I fucking need. So the reason I get up every day, even though there's no races, there's no school, there's nothing in front of me, is because I have pride in myself. I was born David Goggins. David Goggins wasn't good enough. He was a scared, bullied, uh abused kid um who struggled in life. And that kid, whenever something got tough, no matter how hard I trained, no matter how ready I was, whenever something got tough for me, David Goggins the real David Goggins would come out and he would quit. So I realized this over a period of time. So I had to build Goggins. And in that process, that's where I get better. I get better when I'm digging holes in the ground, when I'm waking up early knowing I don't have to do these things. That's where I get better. So it's important to stay hungry. It's important to stay hungry, but it's important more to stay humble within that hunger. So while you're hungry, a lot of people are hungry, but humility is everything. What was that story about William Crawford, the janitor? Yeah. So this guy won the Medal of Honor. So he won the Medal of Honor, and which is the highest award in the military. And this guy went to the Air Force Academy and he was a janitor and no one knew who the fuck this man was. He had the highest award in all the military for heroics, for heroics, saving lives, putting his life on the line, you know, could have been killed. And he is now basically, you know, cleaning shitters. For young kids. And we can all imagine how that probably went. You know, there's probably some, you know, a little bit of taunting here and there. And he just sat there and cleaned the shit. So that's why he's in my trained humility part, because for this man to be at the level he was and have that kind of humility to go, I'm a Medal of Honor winner, but I'm gonna put that in my closet and I'm gonna pick up my broom and dustpan and I'm gonna pick up, you know, this rag and clean this shit for these young men. That right there is amazing for me, man. That's, that's where you grow. That's, that's growth. Huge growth. And also it shows that he was doing his job. He was a servant. He didn't look at himself any better than anybody else. The second you do that, you totally lost. You cannot look at yourself like people with me even. I always look at people. I, I know where you are. I know where, because I've been there. That's why I help so many people out. I've, I've never been above you. I've always pretty much been beneath you, and that's where my knowledge came from. So I know how to reach those people who are in the dungeon because I've been there so many times. You have to be your best self when you're least motivated, and that's the tricky part about all that. Motivation is just a word. You have to have these different things in your mind on where you want to go And know that motivation is not going to get me there because I'm not going to always be motivated. Jocko said the exact same thing. He said that discipline eats motivation for breakfast. And discipline is good too, but without a clear headspace, there's no discipline. What do you mean? So let's say we have a circuit breaker, okay? And I'm loading everything up to one fucking circuit, just loading it up. It's gonna can blow. Once that thing blows, man, the circuit's all fucked up. You gotta have each thing plugged into the right spot. Like a fucking crowded garage, you can't put anything in it. Once your brain is crowded, discipline is great, motivation is great, but if you can't fit shit in your brain because it's all fucking cluttered with shit, There's no discipline. You may have it sometimes when it fits in that crowded garage of your mind, but you don't have the consistency that you need to have with that discipline. I call it mental zones, is you're organizing your mind so you can put that discipline. So a lot of people talk about discipline. Okay, great. Uh Why do you fall off the wagon? Why can't I continue with this routine, going to the gym, being better, waking up early, eating the right foods, it's because maybe it's your kids, maybe it's your wife, maybe it's your job, and it's all just stuffed in your fucking brain. You don't have it compartmentalized and organized in these nice shelves. A lot of people whose brain— hey, where's my dentals? Uh, let me look. They're fucking throwing shit, they're looking through totes, they're all fucked up. So where am I gonna put this discipline in that mind. If I can't find other shit, you gotta be able to find all these different things in your mind. Oh, I can put discipline right there. If your life is not organized, and your life being everything around you, because it takes one little fucked up piece of outside interference to clutter your whole mind. Your mind has to always be clear. That's why I meditate 2 hours every single night, because I refresh, I reorganize the garage, which is my mind, every night. So then discipline's in there, organization, everything is in this right spot. I'm waking up and I'm giving myself all this armor so when I come out in the world, I'm ready. I'm not waking up late, I'm not rushing around, I'm not disorganized, so when I wake up, I'm ready to go. Why is the truth so important? You have to have the truth to have a starting point, and your true self is found in that very uncomfortable zone. We all look for toughness, we all want it, but we look for it in a comfortable environment. You will not find toughness in a comfortable environment. Those of you who are listening to this, you will not find it. The only way you find it is to drown yourself in a position where you're just out of sorts, where you can't swim and you're drowning, where you're drowning. When you say, you know what, man, Fuck that. Once you come face to face with who you are, you have a starting point. It's in our head saying, you know what, man, dude, you're not, you're not doing shit. You're wasting a bunch of percentage here. In this other 80% is suffering, pain, failure, Failure, failure, self-doubt, darkness, and then a whole bunch of light. But to get to this light, you gotta go through all of this shit. You're not succeeding, you're not achieving. It's because you're afraid to go in that dark place to find yourself. You're setting goals you know you can reach, and when you do that That fear, that insecurity, that doubt— that's where you grow. You must always set goals that you think you cannot achieve, and in there you get better. When that alarm clock goes off at 4 or 5 in the morning, your mind says no, you just say, this is what we do, it's what we do now. Because to get to where you want to go, the amount of pain involved, the amount of mental pain of how many times you're gonna have to do something that you don't want to do to get to where you want to go. Every day you must ask yourself, did I do enough? And then once you do this over and over and over again, it becomes like breathing. I don't want to live this lifestyle, but to get to the other side of this, I have to. So if you really want it, you realize what trying is and what trying is not. Your brain is the most powerful weapon in the world. Once you put away your phones and your computers and all that shit we have nowadays, Your brain is the only thing you have when you're going through depression, when you're going through hard times, you're going through death, real life shit. You can't Google that shit, man. You're alone. You're alone. You may have a shrink you're going to, you may have a best friend you're going to, but there's 24 hours in a day where you're alone. Alone in this brain, and your brain is talking to you in all kinds of ways, and it wants to control you and pull you in these different pockets. If you can't control your own brain and your brain controls you, you're fucked. You gotta tell your brain where you wanna go and how you wanna go and how you wanna get there. You gotta control it. If not, it's over. It's over. All I knew back then was hard work. You gotta work hard. You gotta work hard. I can't get this paragraph. I can't remember what the fuck's in this paragraph to pass this test to get in the military. Read again. Still not getting it? Read again. But if you're not getting it, write it out. And that's how I started learning. I realized if I keep going back and going back and going back until the shit just becomes— your mind will say, fuck, okay, we're gonna figure it out. It'll find a way because he is not going to stop. It's not like, I'm gonna try one more time. No, alarm clock goes off, boop, we're going back. I can't read right, we're going back. I gave myself no way out and my mind realized that. They said, okay, we're gonna adapt and overcome now. That was my mindset and that's how you get through things. You put yourself, you immerse yourself wherever it is, you become that. I became hell, and that became my new norm. I gave myself no way out. There was nothing outside these walls of hell. Nothing. I watched this segment on TV about these guys going through Navy SEAL training, and I couldn't even I wasn't a great swimmer, I was afraid of the water, all this crap, man. I saw these guys just quitting, but at the very end it says 22 guys. This commanding officer's up there and he gives this great speech. So I started visualizing me being the 23rd guy sitting there with these guys. I said, man, if I could feel that, that would change my life. And what was that feeling you wanted so bad? Respect? Acknowledgment? No, victory. I wanted to win. Not like beat somebody else. It wasn't about that. I, I just wanted to go the distance. Everything in my life, when something got hard, I quit. I had to work harder than you, so I quit. Like, man, if I could just go that distance, that extra mile, To just go, just to finish. I want to finish. I want to feel victory. And victory for me wasn't winning, it was just finishing. So I said, you know what? If I could feel like these guys feel, it would change my life. And literally, I started feeling victory just by putting myself in the battle. I started realizing, man, just by going to war with myself every day and putting these challenges and these goals and these obstacles, these insurmountable obstacles, now we can move from there. If you look at it as, man, I'm broken and I'm still here and I'm fighting and I'm gonna find a way to get through this because I have no other place to go. It gives you a lot of power. And no one really finds themselves without going through trials, tribulations, suffering, uh accountability. And accountability is suffering. Being accountable every fucking day for doing right for yourself, for the people next to you, it's miserable. The more I did this, the more I gained confidence. And then the more I gained confidence, the more I realized, fuck these Navy SEALs, man. These guys can't do what I'm doing right now. I had no coach, had no trainer, had no money. I didn't know how to lose weight. I had no knowledge of what I was doing. I was just working. I was just sacrificing. But I would have never found these tools if I didn't put myself in a very uncomfortable place. And your true self is found in that very uncomfortable zone. I was not always this strong guy you see. I went through a lot of hard times in my life to get here today. All I wanted to be was an uncommon man. In my whole life, I was not that. I was 6'1 and 300 pounds. I walked in the recruiter's office and he looked at me and he said, you're fat and you're black. He said I basically had to lose 106 pounds in less than 3 months. Uh I came back 3 months later, 106 pounds lighter. Thank you. You have to wake up and you have to give yourself belief. It's about gaining control of your mind, putting things back in the proper perspective, and then saying, I really do want to be here. With every obstacle, I look at it as friction now. Without friction, there is no growth. You have to have friction in your life to grow. So I start looking at m all these different things versus the woe is me mentality, like, oh my God, look at my life. My life's so fucked up. I come from this fucked up family. I'm being beaten. I'm being abused mentally, physically. I started looking at it as a, as the perfect trial ground. So I had to flip it upside down. I said, okay, I'm suffering uh tremendously mentally. Use this to your advantage versus your disadvantage. So that's what I did versus looking at it as like, oh my God, woe is me. I'm never gonna get out of here. I looked at it as, okay, hang on a second. If I can overcome this, if I can find some power in this, some way to get through this, that right there will be the fuel for the rest of my life. And so I found great strength in suffering. It showed me even more of what we have as, as, as humans uh if we're willing to go there and we're willing to push that extra step. A lot of people, man, how do you do what you do? At the end of the day, I ask myself one question. Can I take one more step? And usually the answer is yes. So if you can answer that question and not take another step, that is real failure. That is real quitting. A lot of people can take one more step, but they choose not to. I don't know if you can take 2 steps. Uh You gotta answer that question after you take the first step. But I can always take one more step, so if I choose not to, that's on me, and I gotta live with that. There's a lot of people in graves who have lived 100 years and have never started their real journey. Your real journey starts when you go outside that box and you start climbing mountains and start climbing mountains, and it goes on and it goes on. And just when you're getting ready to quit, you crest that final mountain, you get down and you look, and there you are. But you cannot find your peace you're looking for in yourself until you've overcome yourself. It seems like, m especially with confidence, right, or self-esteem, there's a relationship between confidence and competence. So what you're looking to do is try and have what you believe that you can do be ahead of what you can do, right? Now, you're not looking for it to be delusional. You don't want it to, to be able to believe that you can do something like fly, right? But you need to have a relationship between the two. But what people are asking for is for their confidence to be so far ahead of their competence uh without having even been competent at anything in the beginning. And that's just delusion. That's fantasy, right? Well, I believe that you have to build belief. Belief is like there's an after-school special belief where the mom says, believe in yourself. And that's all great. But there's also a built belief. And the built belief is one Like for me, I came from a bad place. How I build belief is through the, the daunting tasks I put myself through. So that's proof positive that I can. So it correlates. And that's how this piece of shit kid that I once thought I was built belief by saying, hmm, I was in 3 Hell Weeks. I went to Ranger School. I tried out for Delta Selection. Undeniable stack of proof. That is proof, motherfucker. So whenever you think, whenever you think you can't, confidence comes from the thing that you built. You must build belief. You must build confidence. It can't be like, hey, I'm gonna knock that shit out. You gotta look over here and say, I can knock that shit out. Because a lot of people will say, when you wake up in the morning, pound your chest, you know, and look at yourself in the mirror and do all this bullshit. I hope it works. What works for me is that everyday resume, the things I know I've accomplished, the things I know I've done, real hard work, the real calluses on my mind, the real calluses on my hands. That's, that's it. Uh That you don't need to pound your chest in the matter the fuck anymore if you have that. It's belief, and it's built on what you put into yourself. I came from a small town in Indiana where there was a handful of Black families, and a lot of people in that town— when you come from a town of 8,000 people, it's like we had a local plant. Great Dane. You're like, you know what, I want to work at Great Dane and get a house next to my mom. That's what you know. So many of us come from these small places in our mind that we're not willing to think outside only what we've seen. Our mind works in such a small compartment. And one thing I was able to do was to dream, but I was able to dream outside those fucking 4 walls uh of that small town. Until you're able to really put yourself into that dream, but don't make dreams your master, that's where you truly become what you're destined to become. A lot of people sit back and they dream about being a sports figure or dream about being a SEAL or dream about being an astronaut, and all it is is a motherfucking dream. They don't put the work behind the dream. When you become the master of your fucking dream is when you say, I want to go be a Navy SEAL, and you say, okay, I'm gonna lose 106 pounds in less than 3 fucking months. The dream was the one thing I thought about, and the dream was now gone. The dream goes away and the fucking laundry list of fucking details and tasks come up. That's when you become the master of your dream. Ryan Holiday says, talking about the thing and doing the thing vie for the same resources. Allocate yours appropriately. That's it. That's it. That's the way it works as well. That's the way that the brain works. You can actually get these kicks of dopamine by telling your friends about, I'm going to be a Navy SEAL, I'm going to start my training next week, it's going to be great, I'm going to feel like this. Feels good. It feels good to talk about that shit, man. It actually makes you feel good, makes you feel proud, all that shit. But guess what happens? That alarm clock goes off at 4 AM to train. I don't want to be a SEAL today, or I don't want to be whatever today. I'll start tomorrow. And that's the usual pattern of people's lives. That's why I talk about clearing out the mind. Until you really want to do something, you're always going to be a talker. You always get to run your mouth. So if you wake up in morning and you don't want to do something, you don't care enough about yourself. And that's what you need to really research is, man, why am I not doing this for myself? That is the number one purpose in life, is to better oneself. So that's the only purpose I fucking need. So the reason I get up every day, even though there's no race, there's no school, there's nothing in front of me, is because I have pride in myself. But where do you go to? You wake up on a morning, it's cold, it's wet, it's dark, you've got no cartilage in your knee, you've m got shitty shorts, whatever it is that's the issue today. Keep talking. You've got these problems, right? I need you to keep talking about what you were just saying. It's warm on the couch, your missus says stay in bed, it's comfy, it's cozy. You've got work later on. You had an argument last night. You're slightly hungover. I know every motherfucker ain't gonna do what I'm gonna do. So this is how you level up. That's how you level up. I know there's a whole bunch of people with that right there. That fires me up. That makes me fucking happy what you just said. That brings joy to my life right there. Why? Because I know there's so many people that have the ability and just refuse to get off that couch, refuse to study a few more hours, refuse to go deeper, to go further. And that's where I gained the advantage. It's so easy to be great nowadays, my friend, because most people are weak. Most people don't want to go to that extra mile. Most people don't want to find that extra because it sucks. It's miserable. It's lonely. A lot of people wonder, uh how did you become this? How did you become so vulnerable? How are you doing a podcast now when you were this kid? You overcame things. You fought them. And now this is what happens. This is on the other side of overcoming. You become very, very powerful when you overcome yourself. All those things you once cowered from, were afraid of, when you face them eye to eye every day, you now become exactly who you are. You've faced your demons. You were able to heal all your past traumas. When you go to war with yourself, you find a lot of peace because you know exactly who you are. And that is where the peace is really found for me. Talk to me about what it takes to to be on one side of a door in Iraq or anywhere, knowing on the other side of the door, people who are not afraid of you, they're ready for you to come in and you still have— and they have guns and you still have to breach that door? That's, that's a great question. It, it, that's a very scary situation when you are on one side of the door and your mind is racing because on the other side of that door, it could be no one. It could be 4 guys with 4 AK-47s. That, that door you're about to open could be booby-trapped. So once you open it, boom, your legs are gone. So there's a thousand things you think about when you're the first guy, second guy, third guy getting ready to go in a room and flood it. And that's why I talk about the warrior mentality, and that's why so many people are lost when I start talking. You have the right, you're lucky that you don't have to think like warriors think. You're very privileged. I chose this world to be a warrior, and I would choose it again if I came back to this world. But the mentality of a warrior is very different than normal mentality. You must be that person on that door, getting ready to open it, thinking to yourself, If I die, so be it. The only way you can go in that door is knowing there's a great chance you're gonna die. It's like being a SEAL. You train with live ammo. You jump out of an airplane. Every, every, everything you do, you could die. So to be a warrior— why people don't understand me, I'm glad you don't understand me. Merry Christmas, good on you. Because being a warrior takes a whole different mindset, a whole different mindset to know that there's a great chance I may not uh be in the military. Like, I was in for 21 years. I'm lucky. I'm very lucky that I'm alive, able to talk to you, able to still run. But when you sign up on that dotted line to be a SEAL, your mentality changes. I may not live. You gotta accept that. And that's the mentality you have, and that's what makes you a warrior. Warrior. If you're scared to die, you're a bad warrior. I'm also looking at the guys to my left and to my right, realizing that, um, we're here together, man, and I have to, uh, I uh have to be strong for them, and they gotta be strong for me. A lot of people, either you like me or you don't, even in the SEAL Teams, but when you get to that door or you get on that mission or you're getting that op, all that out the door, man. You know, you, you do it honestly. I mean, people say all the time in these movies, and you, you really out there fighting for that guy beside you, and you can't be a coward because you know what? And this, I look at everything I do now in life and this sums it up. I hated jumping out of airplanes. I hated shooting guns. I hated the job as a Navy SEAL, but I did it Because I wanted to change myself. Everything I do, I'm not really comfortable doing. But if you choose to go that route, to go be a Navy SEAL, you might as well go be the hardest motherfucker in the world. Because if you're choosing to do something, you have 2 routes. You can go there and be a little, a little weak person and get through barely, and that's your reputation. Or you can go through the hardest guy you can possibly be, and that's your reputation. So my whole thing is, if you're gonna choose to open that fucking door in Iraq or Afghanistan, open the motherfucker and go in hard. Because they're gonna remember you by slowly opening it and peeking in. So if you're gonna open it and you made the mind to open it, don't crack it open. Open the fucking door and go in. That's with life. If you're choosing uh to do something, attack it. Because they're gonna remember you as not attacking it. So I want to be remembered— you can hate me, but there's one thing you can't say about me, I didn't attack it. So that's the mentality to have. If you're gonna do something, you might as well attack it. 'Cause you're gonna do it anyway. Right. Uh Who on this earth would still be going right now? You are. There's a lot of thought behind a person being a born loser becoming who I am today. You don't just wake up and just Rocky the shit. You gotta wake up and think about, you know, there's a process to getting better, and that process is never finished. Like a lot of times, If your back is hurting, it may not be your fucking back. It may be something else in your body that's making your back hurt. For me, I'm like, man, why can't I get past this fucking hurdle? So like I said, I'm always examining myself every day. What is it? What is it? Well, there's only one thing you haven't examined yet, and it's going back to the beast, going back to the demon. All the times that I was like, I'm not going back. And I went back. I'm not going back. And I went back. I'm not going back. And I went back. It showed me even more of what we have as, as, as humans if we're willing to go there and we're willing to push that extra step. A lot of people, man, how do you do what you do? At the end of the day, I ask myself one question. Can I take one more step? And usually the answer is yes. So if you can answer that question and not take another step, that is real failure. That is real quitting. So a lot of people can take one more step, but they choose not to. I don't know if you can take 2 steps. You gotta answer that question after you take the first step. But I can always take one more step. So if I choose not to, that's on me, and I gotta live with that. I had just climbed a mental wall that was amazing. And I didn't want anybody to take that pain away from me at that point because that was all confirmation. So for me, this was the new level. You don't need a lot of things. Sometimes the only thing that kept me with that one step forward was one thing. Let's not quit yet, guys. Let's think about your options. Where are you going to end up if you quit this shit? Where are you going to go? And when I got done with that race, it's the worst pain. I can't even describe the pain of that last 30 miles to anybody. No one. It's very hard. So when it ended and I'm laying there in the worst pain of my entire life, I'm shaking, I'm jacked up. And all I could think about was, I can't believe what I had just done. Um To me, it was humanly impossible to even think about going 30 more miles in that shape. And once you do it, what came over me when that shower hit me and the reality hit that I just went 101 miles, and that last 31 miles was something that I can't even describe to people. And what's amazing about the human mind is that it becomes your new norm. Like, to think that I can run 200 miles, 240 miles, and that becomes like running 50. I never thought that was possible. This is why I'm m always pushing that limit, because I know that uh within pushing these limits, there's always more. Did that set the tone or the rhythm uh for what you wanted to try and achieve and feel again. Each time there's— you're pushing further. I never wanted to feel it again. I never want to feel it again. But what it did uh was it showed me what is possible, and that's what set the new stage for me. That's when I realized, oh man, I've really been underachieving my entire life. But it taught me what is possible. It taught me like, okay, I got it, check. What about action? Uh And action means less talking and more doing. So um that's where I've been. It only takes 1 second for you to lose the whole thing. So the 1-second decision is just that. You're in a situation where life is sucking. Let's say you're in extreme cold water and your life is flashing before your eyes. Every time that wave goes over your head, your thought process is, I gotta get the fuck out of this water. And you're in Hell Week and you're hour 1 of 130 fucking hours. It's uh cold. I can't be cold this long. And then this is where that 1-second decision comes in. You forgot every reason why you wanted to be to be there. You don't care about SEALs. You don't care about any of this shit. You don't care about fighting for your country. All you want to do is go back home. You want the warmth. You may want something to eat. All those things of comfort are there in that one second. Uh And this is where people lose. So what I do in that one second, because we all think about quitting when shit's hard, but what you have to do in that one second is hard to process information. During pain because that pain takes over and you can't think rationally. You're thinking about fight or flight, save yourself. That's not a rational thought. It's not a thought that's going to get you through hard times. Most people fail that 1 second. So what happens, what I do, I start thinking logically. I calm my brain down because your brain just wants to get out. It's about gaining control of your mind, putting things back in the proper perspective, and then saying, I really do want to be here. And I'm going to have a bunch of these 1 seconds, and I have to learn to control these because if I fail one of these 1 seconds, I will not be a SEAL. I will not be a doctor. I will not be a lawyer. I will not be whatever the fuck it is. So that's how important that 1-second decision is. It's all about your mind takes control of you. You have to say, fuck you, I run this motherfucker. There's no other way to make it out here. I mean, you can't just always be, you know, head down in the sand. You have to learn to pick yourself up on your own. A lot of times these fights and these battles, you gotta be your own fucking coach. You gotta be your own motivator. There's a lot of people in this world who don't want to see you make it because they think you could take a piece of their pie. But I've learned to study people before I react because there's no successful person in the world who's in a good headspace that's going to ever attack anyone in that kind of manner. There's always going to be something wrong with them. So you got to always dive a little deeper before you get your feelings hurt. Take time, take that one second to pull back and study them. Because most people who are in good places, they don't, they don't care about what you're doing. They don't care about what you're doing. They don't try to destroy you. They actually will try to build you up versus destroy who you are as a person. So uh that's where I'm at now in life, is most people who do that, they're in a very dark, dark place. Get bigger, as you get more successful, you open the door for people to critique every fucking thing you do. And most of the people who are critiquing you usually aren't where you are. And all their critiquing comes from people who are really at a low level of life, which is sad. But what we do, people who are on the upper level hearing the haters at the lower level, Like I said, you'll never meet a hater doing better than you. True statement. So I started making these mixtapes with all of these hate messages about people talking shit, and it became such a source of fuel that it was amazing because I know why you hate me. You hate me because you're probably in the bed right now. You're probably an underachiever. You're probably somebody who doesn't want to do anything with your life. So I make you question everything about yourself. So I'm going to continue making you question yourself by coming out here and being even more successful. So what happens is there's days where I'm like, you know what, I really don't want to do this today. I'm like, oh, hang on. So I listen to that while I run. I sometimes play it in the house. It's half comical, it's half inspiring. I'm actually inspired by it because I know I'm gonna get hit in the mouth. There's a, there's an art to getting hit in the mouth, and that is why these things are important. You have to wake up and you have to give yourself belief. You have to give yourself self-confidence. So that— it starts with that run. Belief is like— there's an after-school special belief where the mom says, believe in yourself, and that's all great, but there's also a built belief. How I build belief is through the, the daunting tasks I put myself through. So that's proof positive that I can. You don't become confident by shouting affirmations in the mirror, but by having a stack of undeniable proof that you are who you say you are. Outwork your self-doubt. Yes, because a lot of people, they say when you wake up in the morning, pound your chest, look at yourself in the mirror and do all this fucking bullshit. I hope it works. What works for me is that everyday resume. The things I know I've accomplished, the things I know I've done. Real hard work, the real calluses on my mind, the real calluses on my hands. That's, that's it. You must build belief. You must build confidence and say, I can knock that shit out. Instead of the path of least resistance, I started choosing the path of most resistance to prepare myself for the journey that was coming my way. And you realize through hard work, uh you can outwork anybody, no matter how badass they are. It starts with yourself, man. You gotta start diving into those things that you are afraid of. You don't gain confidence by going to the spot that makes you feel good. It's gonna be a false reality. In the second life gives you that challenge, all you want to do is go back to what gave you confidence. Is that happy spot? No. What gave me confidence was spending years at a kitchen table trying to learn how to read and write on my own, realizing I can't learn the way you learn. I can't, but I can learn. What gives you confidence? Not being afraid. It's overcoming the fear. That's what gives me confidence, is facing these things, overcoming them. And maybe not overcoming them every day, but facing them and facing them and facing them. Pretty soon, like this, you know what, man, this is where it's at. It's not in that comfort zone. It's in the discomfort zone is where my confidence is getting built. That's where it's getting built. Happiness, peace, enlightenment, it's all up here, man. It's all up here. It's all up here. You just gotta be willing to go and face it, and that's the hard part. The physical standard is not what they need to meet. It's a mental standard you must meet in life. That's how I live my life. I now know that there is no cap on the human mind. There's no cap. We cap it ourselves. When most people quit, I had just started. And when you take that mindset and you learn to flip that around That's what made me powerful, and my body followed. And so I said, I want to do this. I'm going to give myself a challenge every single day until the fear goes away. That's right. And I feel like that's what more of us should be doing. I'm hearing that that's what you— how you live your life. That's all it is, man. And it helps me feel so much more confident when you overcome that fear of saying, this doesn't have control over me anymore. That's right. It's like you can be at such more peace. A lot of us speak in hollow words. I used to speak in hollow words. I don't do it anymore. Everything that comes out of my mouth has substance, is real. We all have these feelings in our bodies, in our minds, in our souls. I act on mine. A lot of us who are afraid of something, we allow our minds to choose the path of least resistance, so we go a different route. I'm afraid of something that's telling me you must, you must do that. Life is one big mind game and you're playing it with yourself. M You cannot lose perspective of where you've come in life. I'm trying to give people a different thought process of life. Where failure, hell, disappointment, discomfort is a great learning tool. And many people don't understand that, but it's these few moments in life that you have. Like for me, I always talk about it, Rocky 1, round 14, that one 2-minute and 13-second clip of Rocky getting up when Apollo knocked him down. That one clip, when I was going through a very bad time in my life, I saw what I wanted to be. It wasn't a guy that won. It wasn't a guy that won everything he did. It was a guy that kept getting uh up after being knocked down. So I realized if that 2 minutes and 13 seconds has changed my life. So I was— I saw something that I needed to be in the world I was living in. Maybe my story will give someone the 2 minutes and 13 seconds they need to change their life. Everybody's got a story. We don't share it on social media. We share our nice life on social media. We have— we all have a dungeon. I'm just willing to talk about mine. Mental toughness isn't something that you sample, it's something that you live in every day. Whenever hardness comes, and you don't know what it is, it may be different for you than it is for me, but you go back to your insecurities. And then when you go back to your insecurities, you then look for comfort within those insecurities. And we all look for that. Cookie that your mom used to give you when you were sad, when you were sick. We look for our wife or our husband, we look for comfort. It's in those moments you must retrain your mind to think differently in health. The mental standard is you must know how far you've come. I walk in the room now and I know the hours and years and decades I put into David Goggins. That's something— it's not on the wall, it's not a trophy on the wall, it's not a medal around your neck. I don't care how you perceive David Goggins because through my journey I figured out the one piece I was missing. I thought it was cars, I thought it was women, I thought it was money, I thought it was everything. The one piece I was missing was me having the courage to face myself. Where I got my work ethic from was the hours I had to spend learning this. When you sit down and you're not smart and you have a disability, yeah, ah and you still want to be at the top of your class— I didn't want to just get by. When I realized that I can learn through hard work, and I can beat the valedictorian in school, but I got put in 10 hours more m a day than he does. You know what kind of strength comes from that? When you're sitting down, that guy, that, that valedictorian studied for an hour, and you know, I caught you. I have the work ethic to catch you. That's where David Goggins got really invented. Yeah, was at a kitchen table with 20 spiral notebooks that were empty. And then they were full. And when you can go through that, I still have them in my storage unit. You go through these spiral notebooks of your life and you realize, this is how I learned. This is unbelievable. It wasn't until I got real sick and my life got real quiet. I, I went from running 205 miles in 39 hours till I couldn't get outta bed. My life was taken from me. And that's when I realized I hadn't taken time to think about what I'd done in my life. I'd done all these things, but there was no finish line. I finished the race of life and I wouldn't even receive my medal. I go on, I get in the car and I go. When I started figuring out life, that I was, I was leaving so much in the tank, once I realized, my God, man, I was this dumb, fat kid being bullied, and now I'm a 180-pound person, lost 106 pounds in less than 3 months. Learn to read, learn to do this, learn to do that. I was like, I need more. I was fueling my mind with everything. I never took time to say, my God, you came from this hell and you're here. I had come 8,000 miles from where I started, but if you never know that, you're still in the $7 a month place. So it's that quiet place, it's that place by yourself, it's those hours and years and decades by yourself in the grip of life, when life has you by the throat and choking you out, and you're sitting there calm because you're trying to figure it out. You're You're not panicking, you're not quitting, you're not throwing in the towel. You're saying there's a way around this. And when you figure it out, when life has you gripped in a vice and you can figure that out, that's when you overcome. M That's when you overcome. The journey getting there was harder than going through it. Yeah, you know, so that's the whole thing about life, man. It's that journey that That makes you who you are.